===========================
Converse Extensions Library
===========================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Introduction
============

The Converse Extensions Library is a collection of modules that have
been implemented on top of the Converse API. Each of these modules was
deemed potentially useful to other Converse users, thus, we distribute
these modules along with Converse as a convenience. *You don’t need to
read any part of this manual to use Converse.*

Tag Matching
============

The message manager is a data structure that can be used to put together
runtime systems for languages that support tag-based message retrieval.

The purpose of the message manager is to store, index, and retrieve
messages according to a set of integer tags. It provides functions to
create tables, functions to insert messages into tables (specifying
their tags), and functions to selectively retrieve messages from tables
according to their tags. Wildcard tags can be specified in both storage
and retrieval.

To use the message manager, you must include ``converse.h`` and link
with the Converse library.

In actuality, the term “message manager” is unnecessarily specific. The
message manager can store and retrieve arbitrary pointers according to a
set of tags. The pointers do *not* necessarily need to be pointers to
Converse messages. They can be pointers to anything.

``typedef struct CmmTableStruct *CmmTable``

This opaque type is defined in ``converse.h``. It represents a table
which can be used to store messages. No information is publicized about
the format of a CmmTableStruct.

``#define CmmWildCard (-1)``

This #define is in ``converse.h``. The tag -1 is the “wild card” for the
tag-based lookup functions in the message manager.

``CmmTable CmmNew();``

This function creates a new message-table and returns it.

``void CmmPut(CmmTable t, int ntags, int *tags, void *msg)``

This function inserts a message into a message table, along with an
array of tags. ``ntags`` specifies the length of the ``tags`` array. The
``tags`` array contains the tags themselves. ``msg`` and ``t`` specify
the message and table, respectively.

``void *CmmGet(CmmTable t, int ntags, int *tags, int *ret_tags)``

This function looks up a message from a message table. A message will be
retrieved that “matches” the specified ``tags`` array. If a message is
found that “matches”, the tags with which it was stored are copied into
the ``ret_tags`` array, a pointer to the message will be returned, and
the message will be deleted from the table. If no match is found, 0 will
be returned.

To “match”, the array ``tags`` must be of the same length as the stored
array. Similarly, all the individual tags in the stored array must
“match” the tags in the ``tags`` array. Two tags match if they are equal
to each other, or if ``either`` tag is equal to ``CmmWildCard`` (this
means one can ``store`` messages with wildcard tags, making it easier to
find those messages on retrieval).

``void *CmmProbe(CmmTable t, int ntags, int *tags, int *ret_tags)``

This function is identical to ``CmmGet`` above, except that the message
is not deleted from the table.

``void CmmFree(CmmTable t);``

This function frees a message-table t. WARNING: It also frees all the
messages that have been inserted into the message table. It assumes that
the correct way to do this is to call ``CmiFree`` on the message. If
this assumption is incorrect, a crash will occur. The way to avoid this
problem is to remove and properly dispose all the messages in a table
before disposing the table itself.

Converse Master-Slave Library
=============================

Introduction
------------

CMS is the implementation of the master-slave (or manager-worker or
agenda) parallel programming paradigm on top of Converse.

Available Functions
-------------------

Following functions are available in this library:

``typedef int (*CmsWorkerFn) (void *, void *);``

Prototype for the worker function. See below.

``typedef int (*CmsConsumerFn) (void *, int);``

Prototype for the consumer function. See below.

``void CmsInit(CmsWorkerFn worker, int max);``

This function must be called before firing any tasks for the workers.
max is the largest possible number of tasks you will fire before calling
either ``CmsAwaitResponses`` or ``CmsProcessResponses`` next. (So the
system know how many it may have to buffer).

``int worker(void *t, void **r)``

The user writes this function. Its name does not have to be worker; It
can be anything. worker can be any function that the use writes to
perform the task on the slave processors. It must allocate and compute
the response data structure, and return a pointer to it, by assigning to
r; It must also return the size of the response data structure as its
return value.

``void CmsFireTask(int ref, void * t, int size)``

Creates task to be worked on by a worker. The task description is
pointed to by t, and goes on for size bytes. ref must be a unique serial
number between 0 and max (see ``CmsInit``).

``void CmsAwaitResponses(void);``

This call allows the system to use processor 0 as a worker. It returns
after all the tasks have sent back their responses. The responses
themselves can be extracted using ``CmsGetResponse``.

``void *CmsGetResponse(int ref);``

Extracts the response associated with the reference number ref from the
system’s buffers.

``void CmsProcessResponses(CmsConsumerFn consumer);``

Instead of using ``CmsAwaitResponses``/``CmsGetResponse`` pair, you can
use this call alone. It turns the control over to the CMS system on
processor 0, so it can be used as a worker. As soon as a response is
available on processor 0, cms calls the user specified consumer function
with two parameters: the response (a void \*) and an integer refnum.
(Question: should the size of the response be passed as a parameter to
the consumer? User can do that as an explicit field of the response
themselves, if necessary.)


``void CmsExit(void);``

Must be called on all processors to terminate execution.

Once either ``CmsProcessResponses`` or ``CmsAwaitResponses`` returns,
you may fire the next batch of tasks via CmsFireTask again.

Example Program
---------------

.. code-block:: c++

   #include "cms.h"

   #define MAX 10

   typedef struct {
       float a;
   } Task;

   typedef struct {
       float result;
   } Response;

   Task t;

   int worker(Task *t, Response **r)
   {
       /* do work and generate a single response */
       int i;
       Task *t1;
       int k;

       CmiPrintf("%d: in worker %f \n", CmiMyPe(), t->a);
       *r = (Response *) malloc(sizeof(Response));
       (*r)->result = t->a * t->a;
       return sizeof(Response);
   }

   int consumer(Response * r, int refnum)
   {
       CmiPrintf("consumer: response with refnum = %d is %f\n", refnum,
                 r->result);
   }

   main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       int i, j, k, ref;
       /* 2nd parameter is the max number of tasks
        * fired before "awaitResponses"
        */
       CmsInit((CmsWorkerFn)worker, 20);
       if (CmiMyPe() == 0) { /* I am the manager */
           CmiPrintf("manager inited\n");
           for (i = 0; i < 3; i++) { /* number of iterations or phases */
             /* prepare the next generation of problems to solve */
             /* then, fire the next batch of tasks for the worker */
               for (j = 0; j < 5; j++) {
                   t.a = 10 * i + j;
                   ref = j;  /* a ref number to associate with the task, */
                   /* so that the reponse for this task can be identified. */
                   CmsFireTask(ref, &t, sizeof(t));
               }
             /* Now wait for the responses */
               CmsAwaitResponses();  /* allows proc 0 to be used as a worker. */
               /* Now extract the resoneses from the system */
               for (j = 0; j < 5; j++) {
                   Response *r = (Response *) CmsGetResponse(j);
                   CmiPrintf("Response %d is: %f \n", j, r->result);
               }
             /* End of one mast-slave phase */
               CmiPrintf("End of phase %d\n", i);
           }
       }

       CmiPrintf("Now the consumerFunction mode\n");

       if (CmiMyPe() == 0) { /* I am the manager */
          for (i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
              t.a = 5 + i;
              CmsFireTask(i, &t, sizeof(t));
          }
          CmsProcessResponses((CmsConsumerFn)consumer);
          /* Also allows proc. 0 to be used as a worker.
           * In addition, responses will be processed on processor 0
           * via the "consumer" function as soon as they are available
           */
       }
       CmsExit();
   }

Data Structures
===============

In the course of developing Converse and Charm++ we had to implement a
number of data structures efficiently. If the ANSI standard C library
were available to us on all platforms, we could have used it, but that
was not the case. Also, we needed both the C and C++ bindings of most
data structures. In most cases, the functionality we needed was also a
subset of the C standard library functionality, and by avoiding virtual
methods etc, we have tried to code the most efficient implementations of
those data structures.

Since these data structures are already part of Converse and Charm++,
they are available to the users of these system free of cost :-<).
In this chapter we document the available functions.

Queues, Lists, FIFOs etc.
-------------------------

This data structure is based on circular buffer, and can be used both
like a FIFO and a Stack.

The following functions are available for use in C:

``typedef ... CdsFifo;``

An opaque data type representing a queue of ``void*`` pointers.

``CdsFifo CdsFifo_Create(void);``

Creates a queue in memory and returns its pointer.

``CdsFifo CdsFifo_Create_len(int len);``

Creates a queue in memory with the initial buffer size of len entries
and returns its pointer.

``void CdsFifo_Enqueue(CdsFifo q, void *elt);``

Appends elt at the end of q.

``void *CdsFifo_Dequeue(CdsFifo q);``

Removes an element from the front of the q, and returns it. Returns 0 if
the queue is empty.

``void *CdsFifo_Pop(CdsFifo q);``

Removes an element from the front of the q, and returns it. Returns 0 if
the queue is empty. An alias for the dequeue function.

``void CdsFifo_Push(CdsFifo q, void *elt);``

Inserts elt in the beginning of q.

``int CdsFifo_Empty(CdsFifo q);``

Returns 1 if the q is empty, 0 otherwise.

``int CdsFifo_Length(CdsFifo q);``

Returns the length of the q.

``int CdsFifo_Peek(CdsFifo q);``

Returns the element from the front of the q without removing it.

``void CdsFifo_Destroy(CdsFifo q);``

Releases memory used by q.

The following Templates are available for use in C++:

.. code-block:: c++

   template<class T>
   class CkQ {
     CkQ();  // default constructor
     CkQ(int initial_size); // constructor with initial buffer size
     ~CkQ(); // destructor
     int length(void); // returns length of the q
     bool isEmpty(void); // returns true if q is empty, false otherwise
     T deq(void); // removes and returns the front element
     void enq(const T&); // appends at the end of the list
     void push(const T&); // inserts in the beginning of the list
     T& operator[](size_t n); // returns the n'th element
   };

Converse Pseudorandom Number Generator
======================================

Converse provides three different Linear Congruential Random Number
Generators. Each random number stream has a cycle length of
:math:`2^{64}` as opposed to ANSI C standard’s :math:`2^{48}`. Also,
each of the three random number streams can be split into a number of
per processor streams, so that the random number sequences can be
computed in parallel, and are reproducible. Furthermore, there is no
implicit critical section in the random number generator,and yet, this
functionality is thread-safe, because all the state information is
stored in the structure allocated by the programmer. Further, this state
information is stored in a first class object, and can be passed to
other processors through messages. This module of Converse is based on
the public-domain SPRNG [1]_ package developed by Ashok Srinivasan [2]_
at NCSA.

For minimal change to programs already using C functions ``rand()``,
``srand()``, and ``drand48()``, Converse also maintains a “default”
random number stream.

Interface to the Converse Pseudorandom Number Generator module is as
follows:

``typedef ... CrnStream;``

State information for generating the next random number in the sequence.

``void CrnInitStream(CrnStream *stream, int seed, int type)``

Initializes the new random number stream ``stream`` of ``type`` using
``seed``. ``type`` can have values 0, 1, or 2 to represent three types
of linear congruential random number generators.

``int CrnInt(CrnStream *stream)``

Returns an integer between 0 and :math:`2^{31}-1` corresponding to the
next random number in the sequence associated with ``stream``. Advances
``stream`` by one in the sequence.

``double CrnDouble(CrnStream *stream)``

Returns an double precision floating point number between 0 and 1
corresponding to the next random number in the sequence associated with
``stream``. Advances ``stream`` by one in the sequence.

``float CrnFloat(CrnStream *stream)``

Returns a single precision floating point number between 0 and 1
corresponding to the next random number in the sequence associated with
``stream``. Advances ``stream`` by one in the sequence.

``void CrnSrand(int seed)``

Specifies a different seed for the default random number stream.
Replaces ``srand()``.

``int CrnRand(void)``

Generate the next integer random number from the default random number
stream. Replaces ``rand()``.

``double CrnDrand(void)``

Generate the next double precision random number from the default random
number stream. Replaces ``drand48()``.

Automatic Parameter Marshalling
===============================

Automatic Parameter Marshalling is a concise means of invoking functions
on remote processors. The CPM module handles all the details of packing,
transmitting, translating, and unpacking the arguments. It also takes
care of converting function pointers into handler numbers. With all
these details out of the way, it is possible to perform remote function
invocation in a single line of code.

CPM Basics
----------

The heart of the CPM module is the CPM scanner. The scanner reads a C
source file. When it sees the keyword ``CpmInvokable`` in front of one
of the user’s function declarations, it generates a *launcher* for that
particular function. The *launcher* is a function whose name is ``Cpm_``
concatenated to the name of the user’s function. The launcher accepts
the same arguments as the user’s function, plus a *destination*
argument. Calling the *launcher* transmits a message to another
processor determined by the *destination* argument. When the message
arrives and is handled, the user’s function is called.

For example, if the CPM scanner sees the following function declaration

.. code-block:: c++

       CpmInvokable myfunc(int x, int y) { ... }

The scanner will generate a launcher named ``Cpm_myfunc``. The launcher
has this prototype:

.. code-block:: c++

       void Cpm_myfunc(CpmDestination destination, int x, int y);

If one were to call ``Cpm_myfunc`` as follows:

.. code-block:: c++

       Cpm_myfunc(CpmSend(3), 8, 9);

a message would be sent to processor 3 ordering it to call
``myfunc(8,9)``. Notice that the *destination* argument isn’t just an
integer processor number. The possible destinations for a message are
described later.

When the CPM scanner is applied to a C source file with a particular
name, it generates a certain amount of parameter packing and unpacking
code, and this code is placed in an include file named similarly to the
original C file: the ``.c`` is replaced with ``.cpm.h``. The include
file must be included in the original ``.c`` file, after the
declarations of the types which are being packed and unpacked, but
before all uses of the CPM invocation mechanisms.

Note that the ``.cpm.h`` include file is *not* for prototyping. It
contains the C code for the packing and unpacking mechanisms. Therefore,
it should only be included in the one source file from which it was
generated. If the user wishes to prototype his code, he must do so
normally, by writing a header file of his own.

Each ``.cpm.h`` file contains a function ``CpmInitializeThisModule``,
which initializes the code in *that* ``.cpm.h`` file. The function is
declared ``static``, so it is possible to have one in each ``.cpm.h``
file without conflicts. It is the responsibility of the CPM user to call
each of these ``CpmInitializeThisModule`` functions before using any of
the CPM mechanisms.

We demonstrate the use of the CPM mechanisms using the following short
program ``myprog.c``:

.. code-block:: c++
  :linenos:

   #include "myprog.cpm.h"

   CpmInvokable print_integer(int n)
   {
     CmiPrintf("%d\n", n);
   }

   user_main(int argc, char **argv)
   {
     int i;
     CpmModuleInit();
     CpmInitializeThisModule();
     if (CmiMyPe()==0)
       for (i=1; i<CmiNumPes(); i++)
         Cpm_print_integer(CpmSend(i), rand());
   }

   main(int argc, char **argv)
   {
     ConverseInit(argc, argv, user_main, 0, 0);
   }

Lines 3-6 of this program contain a simple C function that prints an
integer. The function is marked with the word ``CpmInvokable``. When the
CPM scanner sees this word, it adds the function ``Cpm_print_integer``
to the file ``myprog.cpm.h``. The program includes ``myprog.cpm.h`` on
line 1, and initializes the code in there on line 12. Each call to
``Cpm_print_integer`` on line 15 builds a message that invokes
``print_integer``. The destination-argument ``CpmSend(i)`` causes the
message to be sent to the *i*\ ’th processor.

The effect of this program is that the first processor orders each of
the other processors to print a random number. Note that the example is
somewhat minimalist since it doesn’t contain any code for terminating
itself. Also note that it would have been more efficient to use an
explicit broadcast. Broadcasts are described later.

All launchers accept a *CpmDestination* as their first argument. A
*CpmDestination* is actually a pointer to a small C structure containing
routing and handling information. The CPM module has many built-in
functions that return *CpmDestination*\ s. Therefore, any of these can
be used as the first argument to a launcher:

-  **CpmSend(\ pe)** - the message is transmitted to processor pe with
   maximum priority.

-  **CpmEnqueue(\ pe, queueing, priobits, prioptr)** - The message is
   transmitted to processor *pe*, where it is enqueued with the specified
   queueing strategy and priority. The *queueing*, *priobits*, and *prioptr*
   arguments are the same as for **CqsEnqueueGeneral**.

-  **CpmEnqueueFIFO(\ pe)** - the message is transmitted to processor pe and
   enqueued with the middle priority (zero), and FIFO relative to
   messages with the same priority.

-  **CpmEnqueueLIFO(\ pe)** - the message is transmitted to processor pe and
   enqueued with the middle priority (zero), and LIFO relative to
   messages with the same priority.

-  **CpmEnqueueIFIFO(\ pe, prio)** - the message is transmitted to processor
   pe and enqueued with the specified integer-priority prio, and FIFO
   relative to messages with the same priority.

-  **CpmEnqueueILIFO(\ pe, prio)** - the message is transmitted to processor
   pe and enqueued with the specified integer-priority prio, and LIFO
   relative to messages with the same priority.

-  **CpmEnqueueBFIFO(\ pe, priobits, prioptr)** - the message is transmitted
   to processor pe and enqueued with the specified bitvector-priority,
   and FIFO relative to messages with the same priority.

-  **CpmEnqueueBLIFO(\ pe, priobits, prioptr)** - the message is transmitted
   to processor pe and enqueued with the specified bitvector-priority,
   and LIFO relative to messages with the same priority.

-  **CpmMakeThread(\ pe)** - The message is transmitted to processor pe
   where a CthThread is created, and the thread invokes the specified
   function.

All the functions shown above accept processor numbers as arguments.
Instead of supplying a processor number, one can also supply the special
symbols CPM_ALL or CPM_OTHERS, causing a broadcast. For example,

.. code-block:: c++

   Cpm_print_integer(CpmMakeThread(CPM_ALL), 5);

would broadcast a message to all the processors causing each processor
to create a thread, which would in turn invoke ``print_integer`` with
the argument 5.

CPM Packing and Unpacking
-------------------------

Functions preceded by the word **CpmInvokable** must have simple
argument lists. In particular, the argument list of a CpmInvokable
function can only contain cpm-single-arguments and cpm-array-arguments,
as defined by this grammar:

.. code-block:: c++

       cpm-single-argument :== typeword varname
       cpm-array-argument  :== typeword '*' varname

When CPM sees the cpm-array-argument notation, CPM interprets it as
being a pointer to an array. In this case, CPM attempts to pack an
entire array into the message, whereas it only attempts to pack a single
element in the case of the cpm-single-argument notation.

Each cpm-array-argument must be preceded by a cpm-single-argument of
type ``CpmDim``. ``CpmDim`` is simply an alias for ``int``, but when CPM
sees an argument declared ``CpmDim``, it knows that the next argument
will be a cpm-array-argument, and it interprets the ``CpmDim`` argument
to be the size of the array. Given a pointer to the array, its size, and
its element-type, CPM handles the packing of array values as
automatically as it handles single values.

A second program, ``example2.c``, uses array arguments:

.. code-block:: c++
   :linenos:

   #include "example2.cpm.h"

   CpmInvokable print_program_arguments(CpmDim argc, CpmStr *argv)
   {
     int i;
     CmiPrintf("The program's arguments are: ");
     for (i=0; i<argc; i++) CmiPrintf("%s ", argv[i]);
     CmiPrintf("\n");
   }

   user_main(int argc, char **argv)
   {
     CpmModuleInit();
     CpmInitializeThisModule();
     if (CmiMyPe()==0)
       Cpm_print_program_arguments(CpmSend(1), argc, argv);
   }

   main(int argc, char **argv)
   {
     ConverseInit(argc, argv, user_main, 0, 0);
   }

The word ``CpmStr`` is a CPM built-in type, it represents a
null-terminated string:

.. code-block:: c++

   	typedef char *CpmStr;

Therefore, the function ``print_program_arguments`` takes exactly the
same arguments as ``user_main``. In this example, the main program
running on processor 0 transmits the arguments to processor 1, which
prints them out.

Thus far, we have only shown functions whose prototypes contain builtin
CPM types. CPM has built-in knowledge of the following types: char,
short, int, long, float, double, CpmDim, and CpmStr (pointer to a
null-terminated string). However, you may also transmit user-defined
types in a CPM message.

For each (non-builtin) type the user wishes to pack, the user must
supply some pack and unpack routines. The subroutines needed depend upon
whether the type is a pointer or a simple type. Simple types are defined
to be those that contain no pointers at all. Note that some types are
neither pointers, nor simple types. CPM cannot currently handle such
types.

CPM knows which type is which only through the following declarations:

.. code-block:: c++

       CpmDeclareSimple(typeword);
       CpmDeclarePointer(typeword);

The user must supply such declarations for each type that must be sent
via CPM.

When packing a value ``v`` which is a simple type, CPM uses the
following strategy. The generated code first converts ``v`` to network
interchange format by calling ``CpmPack_typename(&v)``, which must
perform the conversion in-place. It then copies ``v`` byte-for-byte into
the message and sends it. When the data arrives, it is extracted from
the message and converted back using ``CpmUnpack_typename(&v)``, again
in-place. The user must supply the pack and unpack routines.

When packing a value ``v`` which is a pointer, the generated code
determines how much space is needed in the message buffer by calling
``CpmPtrSize_typename(v)``. It then transfers the data pointed to by
``v`` into the message using ``CpmPtrPack_typename(p, v)``, where ``p``
is a pointer to the allocated space in the message buffer. When the
message arrives, the generated code extracts the packed data from the
message by calling ``CpmPtrUnpack_typename(p)``. The unpack function
must return a pointer to the unpacked data, which is allowed to still
contain pointers to the message buffer (or simply be a pointer to the
message buffer). When the invocation is done, the function
``CpmPtrFree_typename(v)`` is called to free any memory allocated by the
unpack routine. The user must supply the size, pack, unpack, and free
routines.

The following program fragment shows the declaration of two user-defined
types:

.. code-block:: c++
  :linenos:


   typedef struct { double x,y; } coordinate;
   CpmDeclareSimple(coordinate);

   void CpmPack_coordinate(coordinate *p)
   {
     CpmPack_double(&(p->x));
     CpmPack_double(&(p->y));
   }

   void CpmPack_coordinate(coordinate *p)
   {
     CpmUnpack_double(&(p->x));
     CpmUnpack_double(&(p->y));
   }

   typedef int *intptr;
   CpmDeclarePointer(intptr);

   #define CpmPtrSize_intptr(p) sizeof(int)

   void CpmPtrPack_intptr(void *p, intptr v)
   {
     *(int *)p = *v;
     CpmPack_int((int *)p);
   }

   intptr CpmPtrUnpack_intptr(void *p)
   {
     CpmUnpack_int((int *)p);
     return (int *)p;
   }

   #define CpmPtrFree_intptr(p) (0)

   #include "example3.cpm.h"
   ...

The first type declared in this file is the coordinate. Line 2 contains
the C type declaration, and line 3 notifies CPM that it is a simple
type, containing no pointers. Lines 5-9 declare the pack function, which
receives a pointer to a coordinate, and must pack it in place. It makes
use of the pack-function for doubles, which also packs in place. The
unpack function is similar.

The second type declared in this file is the intptr, which we intend to
mean a pointer to a single integer. On line 18 we notify CPM that the
type is a pointer, and that it should therefore use CpmPtrSize_intptr,
CpmPtrPack_intptr, CpmPtrUnpack_intptr, and CpmPtrFree_intptr. Line 20
shows the size function, a constant: we always need just enough space to
store one integer. The pack function copies the int into the message
buffer, and packs it in place. The unpack function unpacks it in place,
and returns an intptr, which points right to the unpacked integer which
is still in the message buffer. Since the int is still in the message
buffer, and not in dynamically allocated memory, the free function on
line 34 doesn’t have to do anything.

Note that the inclusion of the ``.cpm.h`` file comes after these type
and pack declarations: the ``.cpm.h`` file will reference these
functions and macros, therefore, they must already be defined.

Inventing New Types of CpmDestinations
--------------------------------------

It is possible for the user to create new types of CpmDestinations, and
to write functions that return these new destinations. In order to do
this, one must have a mental model of the steps performed when a Cpm
message is sent. This knowledge is only necessary to those wishing to
invent new kinds of destinations. Others can skip this section.

The basic steps taken when sending a CPM message are:

#. **The destination-structure is created.** The first argument to the
   launcher is a CpmDestination. Therefore, before the launcher is
   invoked, one typically calls a function (like CpmSend) to build the
   destination-structure.

#. **The launcher allocates a message-buffer.** The buffer contains space
   to hold a function-pointer and the function’s arguments. It also
   contains space for an “envelope”, the size of which is determined by
   a field in the destination-structure.

#. **The launcher stores the function-arguments in the message buffer.**
   In doing so, the launcher converts the arguments to a contiguous
   sequence of bytes.

#. **The launcher sets the message’s handler.** For every launcher, there
   is a matching function called an *invoker* The launcher’s job is to
   put the argument data in the message and send the message. The
   *invoker*\ ’s job is to extract the argument data from the message and
   call the user’s function. The launcher uses ``CmiSetHandler`` to tell
   Converse to handle the message by calling the appropriate *invoker*.

#. **The message is sent, received, and handled.** The
   destination-structure contains a pointer to a send-function. The
   send-function is responsible for choosing the message’s destination
   and making sure that it gets there and gets handled. The
   send-function has complete freedom to implement this in any manner it
   wishes. Eventually, though, the message should arrive at a
   destination and its handler should be called.

#. **The user’s function is invoked.** The invoker extracts the function
   arguments from the message buffer and calls the user’s function.

The *send-function* varies because messages take different routes to get
to their final destinations. Compare, for example, CpmSend to
CpmEnqueueFIFO. When CpmSend is used, the message goes straight to the
target processor and gets handled. When CpmEnqueueFIFO is used, the
message goes to the target processor, goes into the queue, comes out of
the queue, and *then* gets handled. The *send-function* must implement
not only the transmission of the message, but also the possible
“detouring” of the message through queues or into threads.

We now show an example CPM command, and describe the steps that are
taken when the command is executed. The command we will consider is this
one:

.. code-block:: c++

   Cpm_print_integer(CpmEnqueueFIFO(3), 12);

Which sends a message to processor 3, ordering it to call
``print_integer(12)``.

The first step is taken by CpmEnqueueFIFO, which builds the
CpmDestination. The following is the code for CpmEnqueueFIFO:

.. code-block:: c++

   typedef struct CpmDestinationSend_s
   {
     void *(*sendfn)();
     int envsize;
     int pe;
   }
   *CpmDestinationSend;

   CpmDestination CpmEnqueueFIFO(int pe)
   {
     static struct CpmDestinationSend_s ctrl;
     ctrl.envsize = sizeof(int);
     ctrl.sendfn  = CpmEnqueueFIFO1;
     ctrl.pe = pe;
     return (CpmDestination)&ctrl;
   }

Notice that the CpmDestination structure varies, depending upon which
kind of destination is being used. In this case, the destination
structure contains a pointer to the send-function ``CpmEnqueueFIFO1``, a
field that controls the size of the envelope, and the
destination-processor. In a CpmDestination, the ``sendfn`` and
``envsize`` fields are required, additional fields are optional.

After CpmEnqueueFIFO builds the destination-structure, the launcher
Cpm_print_integer is invoked. Cpm_print_integer performs all the steps
normally taken by a launcher:

#. **It allocates the message buffer.** In this case, it sets aside just
   enough room for one int as an envelope, as dictated by the
   destination-structure’s envsize field.

#. **It stores the function-arguments in the message-buffer.** In this
   case, the function-arguments are just the integer 12.

#. **It sets the message’s handler.** In this case, the message’s handler
   is set to a function that will extract the arguments and call
   print_integer.

#. **It calls the send-function to send the message.**

The code for the send-function is here:

.. code-block:: c++

   void *CpmEnqueueFIFO1(CpmDestinationSend dest, int len, void *msg)
   {
     int *env = (int *)CpmEnv(msg);
     env[0] = CmiGetHandler(msg);
     CmiSetHandler(msg, CpvAccess(CpmEnqueueFIFO2_Index));
     CmiSyncSendAndFree(dest->pe,len,msg);
   }

The send-function CpmEnqueueFIFO1 starts by switching the handler. The
original handler is removed using ``CmiGetHandler``. It is set aside in
the message buffer in the “envelope” space described earlier — notice
the use of ``CpmEnv`` to obtain the envelope. This is the purpose of the
envelope in the message — it is a place where the send-function can
store information. The destination-function must anticipate how much
space the send-function will need, and it must specify that amount of
space in the destination-structure field *envsize*. In this case, the
envelope is used to store the original handler, and the message’s
handler is set to an internal function called ``CpmEnqueueFIFO2``.

After switching the handler, ``CpmEnqueueFIFO1`` sends the message.
Eventually, the message will be received by ``CsdScheduler``, and its
handler will be called. The result will be that ``CpmEnqueueFIFO2`` will
be called on the destination processor. Here is the code for
``CpmEnqueueFIFO2``:

.. code-block:: c++

   void CpmEnqueueFIFO2(void *msg)
   {
     int *env;
     CmiGrabBuffer(&msg);
     env = (int *)CpmEnv(msg);
     CmiSetHandler(msg, env[0]);
     CsdEnqueueFIFO(msg);
   }

This function takes ownership of the message-buffer from Converse using
``CmiGrabBuffer``. It extracts the original handler from the envelope
(the handler that calls ``print_integer``), and restores it using
``CmiSetHandler``. Having done so, it enqueues the message with the FIFO
queueing policy. Eventually, the scheduler picks the message from the
queue, and ``print_integer`` is invoked.

In summary, the procedure for implementing new kinds of destinations is
to write one send-function, one function returning a CpmDestination
(which contains a reference to the send-function), and one or more
Converse handlers to manipulate the message.

The destination-function must return a pointer to a
“destination-structure”, which can in fact be any structure matching the
following specifications:

-  The first field must be a pointer to a send-function,

-  The second field must the an integer, the envelope-size.

This pointer must be coerced to type CpmDestination.

The send-function must have the following prototype:

.. code-block:: c++

       void sendfunction(CpmDestination dest, int msglen, void *msgptr)

It can access the envelope of the message using CpmEnv:

.. code-block:: c++

       int *CpmEnv(void *msg);

It can also access the data stored in the destination-structure by the
destination-function.

Load Balancing
==============

Using Converse Load Balancers
-----------------------------

This module defines a function **CldEnqueue** that sends a message to a
lightly-loaded processor. It automates the process of finding a
lightly-loaded processor.

The function **CldEnqueue** is extremely sophisticated. It does not
choose a processor, send the message, and forget it. Rather, it puts the
message into a pool of movable work. The pool of movable work gradually
shrinks as it is consumed (processed), but in most programs, there is
usually quite a bit of movable work available at any given time. As load
conditions shift, the load balancers shifts the pool around,
compensating. Any given message may be shifted more than once, as part
of the pool.

**CldEnqueue** also accounts for priorities. Normal load-balancers try
to make sure that all processors have some work to do. The function
**CldEnqueue** goes a step further: it tries to make sure that all
processors have some reasonably high-priority work to do. This can be
extremely helpful in AI search applications.

The two assertions above should be qualified: **CldEnqueue** can use
these sophisticated strategies, but it is also possible to configure it
for different behavior. When you compile and link your program, you
choose a *load-balancing strategy*. That means you link in one of several
implementations of the load-balancer. Most are sophisticated, as
described above. But some are simple and cheap, like the random
strategy. The process of choosing a strategy is described in the manual
*Converse Installation and Usage*.

Before you send a message using **CldEnqueue**, you must write an *info*
function with this prototype:

``void InfoFn(void *msg, CldPackFn *pfn, int *len, int *queueing, int
*priobits, unsigned int *prioptr);``

The load balancer will call the
info function when it needs to know various things about the message.
The load balancer will pass in the message via the parameter ``msg``.
The info function’s job is to “fill in” the other parameters. It must
compute the length of the message, and store it at ``*len``. It must
determine the *pack* function for the message, and store a pointer to it
at ``*pfm``. It must identify the priority of the message, and the
queueing strategy that must be used, storing this information at
``*queueing``, ``*priobits``, and ``*prioptr``. Caution: the priority
will not be copied, so the ``*prioptr`` should probably be made to point
to the message itself.

After the user of **CldEnqueue** writes the “info” function, the user
must register it, using this:

``int CldRegisterInfoFn(CldInfoFn fn)``

Accepts a pointer to an info-function. Returns an integer index for the
info-function. This index will be needed in **CldEnqueue**.

Normally, when you send a message, you pack up a bunch of data into a
message, send it, and unpack it at the receiving end. It is sometimes
possible to perform an optimization, though. If the message is bound for
a processor within the same address space, it isn’t always necessary to
copy all the data into the message. Instead, it may be sufficient to
send a message containing only a pointer to the data. This saves much
packing, unpacking, and copying effort. It is frequently useful, since
in a properly load-balanced program, a great many messages stay inside a
single address space.

With CldEnqueue, you don’t know in advance whether a message is going to
cross address-space boundaries or not. If it’s to cross address spaces,
you need to use the “long form”, but if it’s to stay inside an address
space, you want to use the faster “short form”. We call this
“conditional packing.” When you send a message with **CldEnqueue**, you
should initially assume it will not cross address space boundaries. In
other words, you should send the “short form” of the message, containing
pointers. If the message is about to leave the address space, the load
balancer will call your pack function, which must have this prototype:

``void PackFn(void **msg)``

The pack function is handed a pointer to a
pointer to the message (yes, a pointer to a pointer). The pack function
is allowed to alter the message in place, or replace the message with a
completely different message. The intent is that the pack function
should replace the “short form” of the message with the “long form” of
the message. Note that if it replaces the message, it should CmiFree the
old message.

Of course, sometimes you don’t use conditional packing. In that case,
there is only one form of the message. In that case, your pack function
can be a no-op.

Pack functions must be registered using this:

``int CldRegisterPackFn(CldPackFn fn)``

Accepts a pointer to an pack-function. Returns an integer index for the
pack-function. This index will be needed in **CldEnqueue**.

Normally, **CldEnqueue** sends a message to a lightly-loaded processor.
After doing this, it enqueues the message with the appropriate priority.
The function CldEnqueue can also be used as a mechanism to simply
enqueue a message on a remote processor with a priority. In other words,
it can be used as a prioritized send-function. To do this, one of the
CldEnqueue parameters allows you to override the load-balancing behavior
and lets you choose a processor yourself.

The prototype for **CldEnqueue** is as follows:

``void CldEnqueue(int pe, void *msg, int infofn)``

The argument ``msg`` is a pointer to the message. The parameter
``infofn`` represents a function that can analyze the message. The
parameter ``packfn`` represents a function that can pack the message. If
the parameter ``pe`` is ``CLD_ANYWHERE``, the message is sent to a
lightly-loaded processor and enqueued with the appropriate priority. If
the parameter ``pe`` is a processor number, the message is sent to the
specified processor and enqueued with the appropriate priority.
**CldEnqueue** frees the message buffer using **CmiFree**.

The following simple example illustrates how a Converse program can make
use of the load balancers.

``hello.c:``

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <stdio.h>
   #include "converse.h"
   #define CHARES 10

   void startup(int argc, char *argv[]);
   void registerAndInitialize();

   typedef struct pemsgstruct
   {
     char header[CmiExtHeaderSizeBytes];
     int pe, id, pfnx;
     int queuing, priobits;
     unsigned int prioptr;
   } pemsg;

   CpvDeclare(int, MyHandlerIndex);
   CpvDeclare(int, InfoFnIndex);
   CpvDeclare(int, PackFnIndex);

   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
     ConverseInit(argc, argv, startup, 0, 0);
     CsdScheduler(-1);
   }

   void startup(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
     pemsg *msg;
     int i;

     registerAndInitialize();
     for (i=0; i<CHARES; i++) {
       msg = (pemsg *)malloc(sizeof(pemsg));
       msg->pe = CmiMyPe();
       msg->id = i;
       msg->pfnx = CpvAccess(PackFnIndex);
       msg->queuing = CQS_QUEUEING_FIFO;
       msg->priobits = 0;
       msg->prioptr = 0;
       CmiSetHandler(msg, CpvAccess(MyHandlerIndex));
       CmiPrintf("[%d] sending message %d\n", msg->pe, msg->id);
       CldEnqueue(CLD_ANYWHERE, msg, CpvAccess(InfoFnIndex));
       /*    CmiSyncSend(i, sizeof(pemsg), &msg); */
     }
   }

   void MyHandler(pemsg *msg)
   {
     CmiPrintf("Message %d created on %d handled by %d.\n", msg->id, msg->pe,
   	    CmiMyPe());
   }

   void InfoFn(pemsg *msg, CldPackFn *pfn, int *len, int *queuing, int *priobits,
   	    unsigned int *prioptr)
   {
     *pfn = (CldPackFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(msg->pfnx);
     *len = sizeof(pemsg);
     *queuing = msg->queuing;
     *priobits = msg->priobits;
     prioptr = &(msg->prioptr);
   }

   void PackFn(pemsg **msg)
   {
   }

   void registerAndInitialize()
   {
     CpvInitialize(int, MyHandlerIndex);
     CpvAccess(MyHandlerIndex) = CmiRegisterHandler(MyHandler);
     CpvInitialize(int, InfoFnIndex);
     CpvAccess(InfoFnIndex) = CldRegisterInfoFn((CldInfoFn)InfoFn);
     CpvInitialize(int, PackFnIndex);
     CpvAccess(PackFnIndex) = CldRegisterPackFn((CldPackFn)PackFn);
   }

How to Write a Load Balancer for Converse/Charm++
-------------------------------------------------

.. _introduction-2:

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This manual details how to write your own general-purpose message-based
load balancer for Converse. A Converse load balancer can be used by any
Converse program, but also serves as a *seed* load balancer for Charm++
chare creation messages. Specifically, to use a load balancer, you would
pass messages to CldEnqueue rather than directly to the scheduler. This
is the default behavior with chare creation message in Charm++. Thus,
the primary provision of a new load balancer is an implementation of the
CldEnqueue function.

Existing Load Balancers and Provided Utilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Throughout this manual, we will occasionally refer to the source code of
two provided load balancers, the random initial placement load balancer
(``cldb.rand.c``) and the virtual topology-based load balancer
(``cldb.neighbor.c``) which applies virtual topology including dense
graph to construct neighbors. The functioning of these balancers is
described in the Charm++ manual load balancing section.

In addition, a special utility is provided that allows us to add and
remove load-balanced messages from the scheduler’s queue. The source
code for this is available in ``cldb.c``. The usage of this utility will
also be described here in detail.

A Sample Load Balancer
----------------------

This manual steps through the design of a load balancer using an example
which we will call ``test``. The ``test`` load balancer has each
processor periodically send half of its load to its neighbor in a ring.
Specifically, for N processors, processor K will send approximately half
of its load to (K+1)%N, every 100 milliseconds (this is an example only;
we leave the genius approaches up to you).

Minimal Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The minimal requirements for a load balancer are illustrated by the
following code.

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <stdio.h>
   #include "converse.h"

   const char *CldGetStrategy(void)
   {
     return "test";
   }

   CpvDeclare(int, CldHandlerIndex);

   void CldHandler(void *msg)
   {
     CldInfoFn ifn; CldPackFn pfn;
     int len, queueing, priobits; unsigned int *prioptr;

     CmiGrabBuffer((void **)&msg);
     CldRestoreHandler(msg);
     ifn = (CldInfoFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(CmiGetInfo(msg));
     ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
     CsdEnqueueGeneral(msg, queueing, priobits, prioptr);
   }

   void CldEnqueue(int pe, void *msg, int infofn)
   {
     int len, queueing, priobits; unsigned int *prioptr;
     CldInfoFn ifn = (CldInfoFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(infofn);
     CldPackFn pfn;

     if (pe == CLD_ANYWHERE) {
       /* do what you want with the message; in this case we'll just keep
          it local */
       ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       CmiSetInfo(msg,infofn);
       CsdEnqueueGeneral(msg, queueing, priobits, prioptr);
     }
     else {
       /* pe contains a particular destination or broadcast */
       ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       if (pfn) {
         pfn(&msg);
         ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       }
       CldSwitchHandler(msg, CpvAccess(CldHandlerIndex));
       CmiSetInfo(msg,infofn);
       if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST)
         CmiSyncBroadcastAndFree(len, msg);
       else if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST_ALL)
         CmiSyncBroadcastAllAndFree(len, msg);
       else CmiSyncSendAndFree(pe, len, msg);
     }
   }

   void CldModuleInit()
   {
     char *argv[] = { NULL };
     CpvInitialize(int, CldHandlerIndex);
     CpvAccess(CldHandlerIndex) = CmiRegisterHandler(CldHandler);
     CldModuleGeneralInit(argv);
   }

The primary function a load balancer must provide is the **CldEnqueue**
function, which has the following prototype:

``void CldEnqueue(int pe, void *msg, int infofn);``

This function takes three parameters: ``pe``, ``msg`` and ``infofn``.
``pe`` is the intended destination of the ``msg``. ``pe`` may take on
one of the following values:

-  Any valid processor number - the message must be sent to that
   processor

-  ``CLD_ANYWHERE`` - the message can be placed on any processor

-  ``CLD_BROADCAST`` - the message must be sent to all processors
   excluding the local processor

-  ``CLD_BROADCAST_ALL`` - the message must be sent to all processors
   including the local processor

**CldEnqueue** must handle all of these possibilities. The only case in
which the load balancer should get control of a message is when
``pe = CLD_ANYWHERE``. All other messages must be sent off to their
intended destinations and passed on to the scheduler as if they never
came in contact with the load balancer.

The integer parameter ``infofn`` is a handler index for a user-provided
function that allows CldEnqueue to extract information about (mostly
components of) the message ``msg``.

Thus, an implementation of the **CldEnqueue** function might have the
following structure:

.. code-block:: c++

   void CldEnqueue(int pe, void *msg, int infofn)
   {
     ...
     if (pe == CLD_ANYWHERE)
       /* These messages can be load balanced */
     else if (pe == CmiMyPe())
       /* Enqueue the message in the scheduler locally */
     else if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST)
       /* Broadcast to all but self */
     else if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST_ALL)
       /* Broadcast to all plus self */
     else /* Specific processor number was specified */
       /* Send to specific processor */
   }

In order to fill in the code above, we need to know more about the
message before we can send it off to a scheduler’s queue, either locally
or remotely. For this, we have the info function. The prototype of an
info function must be as follows:

``void ifn(void *msg, CldPackFn *pfn, int *len, int *queueing,
int *priobits, unsigned int **prioptr);``

Thus, to use the info function, we need to get the actual function via
the handler index provided to **CldEnqueue**. Typically,
**CldEnqueue** would contain the following declarations:

.. code-block:: c++

     int len, queueing, priobits;
     unsigned int *prioptr;
     CldPackFn pfn;
     CldInfoFn ifn = (CldInfoFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(infofn);

Subsequently, a call to ``ifn`` would look like this:

.. code-block:: c++

     ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);

The info function extracts information from the message about its size,
queuing strategy and priority, and also a pack function, which will be
used when we need to send the message elsewhere. For now, consider the
case where the message is to be locally enqueued:

.. code-block:: c++

     ...
     else if (pe == CmiMyPe())
       {
         ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
         CsdEnqueueGeneral(msg, queueing, priobits, prioptr);
       }
     ...

Thus, we see the info function is used to extract info from the message
that is necessary to pass on to **CsdEnqueueGeneral**.

In order to send the message to a remote destination and enqueue it in
the scheduler, we need to pack it up with a special pack function so
that it has room for extra handler information and a reference to the
info function. Therefore, before we handle the last three cases of
**CldEnqueue**, we have a little extra work to do:

.. code-block:: c++

     ...
     else
       {
         ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
         if (pfn) {
           pfn(&msg);
           ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
         }
         CldSwitchHandler(msg, CpvAccess(CldHandlerIndex));
         CmiSetInfo(msg,infofn);
         ...

Calling the info function once gets the pack function we need, if there
is one. We then call the pack function which rearranges the message
leaving space for the info function, which we will need to call on the
message when it is received at its destination, and also room for the
extra handler that will be used on the receiving side to do the actual
enqueuing. **CldSwitchHandler** is used to set this extra handler, and
the receiving side must restore the original handler.

In the above code, we call the info function again because some of the
values may have changed in the packing process.

Finally, we handle our last few cases:

.. code-block:: c++

     ...
         if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST)
           CmiSyncBroadcastAndFree(len, msg);
         else if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST_ALL)
           CmiSyncBroadcastAllAndFree(len, msg);
         else CmiSyncSendAndFree(pe, len, msg);
       }
   }

The above example also provides **CldHandler** which is used to receive
messages that **CldEnqueue** forwards to other processors.

.. code-block:: c++

   CpvDeclare(int, CldHandlerIndex);

   void CldHandler(void *msg)
   {
     CldInfoFn ifn; CldPackFn pfn;
     int len, queueing, priobits; unsigned int *prioptr;

     CmiGrabBuffer((void **)&msg);
     CldRestoreHandler(msg);
     ifn = (CldInfoFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(CmiGetInfo(msg));
     ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
     CsdEnqueueGeneral(msg, queueing, priobits, prioptr);
   }

Note that the **CldHandler** properly restores the message’s original
handler using **CldRestoreHandler**, and calls the info function to
obtain the proper parameters to pass on to the scheduler. We talk about
this more below.

Finally, Converse initialization functions call **CldModuleInit** to
initialize the load balancer module.

.. code-block:: c++

   void CldModuleInit()
   {
     char *argv[] = { NULL };
     CpvInitialize(int, CldHandlerIndex);
     CpvAccess(CldHandlerIndex) = CmiRegisterHandler(CldHandler);
     CldModuleGeneralInit(argv);

     /* call other init processes here */
     CldBalance();
   }

Provided Load Balancing Facilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Converse provides a number of structures and functions to aid in load
balancing (see cldb.c). Foremost amongst these is a method for queuing
tokens of messages in a processor’s scheduler in a way that they can be
removed and relocated to a different processor at any time. The
interface for this module is as follows:

.. code-block:: c++

   void CldSwitchHandler(char *cmsg, int handler)
   void CldRestoreHandler(char *cmsg)
   int CldCountTokens()
   int CldLoad()
   void CldPutToken(char *msg)
   void CldGetToken(char **msg)
   void CldModuleGeneralInit(char **argv)

Messages normally have a handler index associated with them, but in
addition they have extra space for an additional handler. This is used
by the load balancer when we use an intermediate handler (typically
**CldHandler**) to handle the message when it is received after
relocation. To do this, we use **CldSwitchHandler** to temporarily swap
the intended handler with the load balancer handler. When the message is
received, **CldRestoreHandler** is used to change back to the intended
handler.

**CldPutToken** puts a message in the scheduler queue in such a way that
it can be retrieved from the queue. Once the message gets handled, it
can no longer be retrieved. **CldGetToken** retrieves a message that was
placed in the scheduler queue in this way. **CldCountTokens** tells you
how many tokens are currently retrievable. **CldLoad** gives a slightly
more accurate estimate of message load by counting the total number of
messages in the scheduler queue.

**CldModuleGeneralInit** is used to initialize this load balancer helper
module. It is typically called from the load balancer’s
**CldModuleInit** function.

The helper module also provides the following functions:

.. code-block:: c++

   void CldMultipleSend(int pe, int numToSend)
   int CldRegisterInfoFn(CldInfoFn fn)
   int CldRegisterPackFn(CldPackFn fn)

**CldMultipleSend** is generally useful for any load balancer that sends
multiple messages to one processor. It works with the token queue module
described above. It attempts to retrieve up to ``numToSend`` messages,
and then packs them together and sends them, via CmiMultipleSend, to
``pe``. If the number and/or size of the messages sent is very large,
**CldMultipleSend** will transmit them in reasonably sized parcels. In
addition, the **CldBalanceHandler** and its associated declarations and
initializations are required to use it.

You may want to use the three status variables. These can be used to
keep track of what your LB is doing (see usage in cldb.neighbor.c and
itc++queens program).

.. code-block:: c++

   CpvDeclare(int, CldRelocatedMessages);
   CpvDeclare(int, CldLoadBalanceMessages);
   CpvDeclare(int, CldMessageChunks);

The two register functions register *info* and *pack* functions, returning
an index for the functions. Info functions are used by the load balancer
to extract the various components from a message. Amongst these
components is the pack function index. If necessary, the pack function
can be used to pack a message that is about to be relocated to another
processor. Information on how to write info and pack functions is
available in the load balancing section of the Converse Extensions
manual.

Finishing the ``Test`` Balancer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``test`` balancer is a somewhat silly strategy in which every
processor attempts to get rid of half of its load by periodically
sending it to someone else, regardless of the load at the destination.
Hopefully, you won’t actually use this for anything important!

The ``test`` load balancer is available in
charm/src/Common/conv-ldb/cldb.test.c. To try out your own load balancer
you can use this filename and SUPER_INSTALL will compile it and you can
link it into your Charm++ programs with -balance test. (To add your own
new balancers permanently and give them another name other than "test"
you will need to change the Makefile used by SUPER_INSTALL. Don’t worry
about this for now.) The cldb.test.c provides a good starting point for
new load balancers.

Look at the code for the ``test`` balancer below, starting with the
**CldEnqueue** function. This is almost exactly as described earlier.
One exception is the handling of a few extra cases: specifically if we
are running the program on only one processor, we don’t want to do any
load balancing. The other obvious difference is in the first case: how
do we handle messages that can be load balanced? Rather than enqueuing
the message directly with the scheduler, we make use of the token queue.
This means that messages can later be removed for relocation.
**CldPutToken** adds the message to the token queue on the local
processor.

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <stdio.h>
   #include "converse.h"
   #define PERIOD 100
   #define MAXMSGBFRSIZE 100000

   const char *CldGetStrategy(void)
   {
     return "test";
   }

   CpvDeclare(int, CldHandlerIndex);
   CpvDeclare(int, CldBalanceHandlerIndex);
   CpvDeclare(int, CldRelocatedMessages);
   CpvDeclare(int, CldLoadBalanceMessages);
   CpvDeclare(int, CldMessageChunks);

   void CldDistributeTokens()
   {
     int destPe = (CmiMyPe()+1)%CmiNumPes(), numToSend;

     numToSend = CldLoad() / 2;
     if (numToSend > CldCountTokens())
       numToSend = CldCountTokens() / 2;
     if (numToSend > 0)
       CldMultipleSend(destPe, numToSend);
     CcdCallFnAfter((CcdVoidFn)CldDistributeTokens, NULL, PERIOD);
   }

   void CldBalanceHandler(void *msg)
   {
     CmiGrabBuffer((void **)&msg);
     CldRestoreHandler(msg);
     CldPutToken(msg);
   }

   void CldHandler(void *msg)
   {
     CldInfoFn ifn; CldPackFn pfn;
     int len, queueing, priobits; unsigned int *prioptr;

     CmiGrabBuffer((void **)&msg);
     CldRestoreHandler(msg);
     ifn = (CldInfoFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(CmiGetInfo(msg));
     ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
     CsdEnqueueGeneral(msg, queueing, priobits, prioptr);
   }

   void CldEnqueue(int pe, void *msg, int infofn)
   {
     int len, queueing, priobits; unsigned int *prioptr;
     CldInfoFn ifn = (CldInfoFn)CmiHandlerToFunction(infofn);
     CldPackFn pfn;

     if ((pe == CLD_ANYWHERE) && (CmiNumPes() > 1)) {
       ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       CmiSetInfo(msg,infofn);
       CldPutToken(msg);
     }
     else if ((pe == CmiMyPe()) || (CmiNumPes() == 1)) {
       ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       CmiSetInfo(msg,infofn);
       CsdEnqueueGeneral(msg, queueing, priobits, prioptr);
     }
     else {
       ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       if (pfn) {
         pfn(&msg);
         ifn(msg, &pfn, &len, &queueing, &priobits, &prioptr);
       }
       CldSwitchHandler(msg, CpvAccess(CldHandlerIndex));
       CmiSetInfo(msg,infofn);
       if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST)
         CmiSyncBroadcastAndFree(len, msg);
       else if (pe==CLD_BROADCAST_ALL)
         CmiSyncBroadcastAllAndFree(len, msg);
       else CmiSyncSendAndFree(pe, len, msg);
     }
   }

   void CldModuleInit()
   {
     char *argv[] = { NULL };
     CpvInitialize(int, CldHandlerIndex);
     CpvAccess(CldHandlerIndex) = CmiRegisterHandler(CldHandler);
     CpvInitialize(int, CldBalanceHandlerIndex);
     CpvAccess(CldBalanceHandlerIndex) = CmiRegisterHandler(CldBalanceHandler);
     CpvInitialize(int, CldRelocatedMessages);
     CpvInitialize(int, CldLoadBalanceMessages);
     CpvInitialize(int, CldMessageChunks);
     CpvAccess(CldRelocatedMessages) = CpvAccess(CldLoadBalanceMessages) =
       CpvAccess(CldMessageChunks) = 0;
     CldModuleGeneralInit(argv);
     if (CmiNumPes() > 1)
       CldDistributeTokens();
   }

Now look two functions up from **CldEnqueue**. We have an additional
handler besides the **CldHandler**: the **CldBalanceHandler**. The
purpose of this special handler is to receive messages that can be still
be relocated again in the future. Just like the first case of
**CldEnqueue** uses **CldPutToken** to keep the message retrievable,
**CldBalanceHandler** does the same with relocatable messages it
receives. **CldHandler** is only used when we no longer want the message
to have the potential for relocation. It places messages irretrievably
in the scheduler queue.

Next we look at our initialization functions to see how the process gets
started. The **CldModuleInit** function gets called by the common
Converse initialization code and starts off the periodic load
distribution process by making a call to **CldDistributeTokens**. The
entirety of the balancing is handled by the periodic invocation of this
function. It computes an approximation of half of the PE’s total load
(**CsdLength**\ ()), and if that amount exceeds the number of movable
messages ( **CldCountTokens**\ ()), we attempt to move all of the
movable messages. To do this, we pass this number of messages to move
and the number of the PE to move them to, to the **CldMultipleSend**
function.

.. _conv-futures:

Futures
=======

This library supports the *future* abstraction, defined and used by
Halstead and other researchers.

**Cfuture CfutureCreate()**

Returns the handle of an empty future. The future is said to reside on
the processor that created it. The handle is a *global* reference to the
future, in other words, it may be copied freely across processors.
However, while the handle may be moved across processors freely, some
operations can only be performed on the processor where the future
resides.

**Cfuture CfutureSet(Cfuture future, void \*value, int nbytes)**

Makes a copy of the value and stores it in the future. CfutureSet may be
performed on processors other than the one where the future resides. If
done remotely, the copy of the value is created on the processor where
the future resides.

**void \*CfutureWait(Cfuture fut)**

Waits until the future has been filled, then returns a pointer to the
contents of the future. If the future has already been filled, this
happens immediately (without blocking). Caution: CfutureWait can only be
done on the processor where the Cfuture resides. A second caution:
blocking operations (such as this one) can only be done in user-created
threads.

**void CfutureDestroy(Cfuture f)**

Frees the space used by the specified Cfuture. This also frees the value
stored in the future. Caution: this operation can only be done on the
processor where the Cfuture resides.

**void\* CfutureCreateValue(int nbytes)**

Allocates the specified amount of memory and returns a pointer to it.
This buffer can be filled with data and stored into a future, using
CfutureStoreBuffer below. This combination is faster than using
CfutureSet directly.

**void CfutureStoreValue(Cfuture fut, void \*value)**

Make a copy of the value and stores it in the future, destroying the
original copy of the value. This may be significantly faster than the
more general function, CfutureSet (it may avoid copying). This function
can *only* used to store values that were previously extracted from
other futures, or values that were allocated using CfutureCreateValue.

**void CfutureModuleInit()**

This function initializes the futures module. It must be called once on
each processor, during the handler-registration process (see the
Converse manual regarding CmiRegisterHandler).

Converse-POSIX threads
======================

We have implemented the POSIX threads API on top of Converse threads. To
use the Converse-pthreads, you must include the header file:

``#include <cpthreads.h>``

Refer to the POSIX threads documentation for the documentation on the
pthreads functions and types. Although Converse-pthreads threads are
POSIX-compliant in most ways, there are some specific things one needs
to know to use our implementation.

Pthreads and Converse
---------------------

Our pthreads implementation is designed to exist within a Converse
environment. For example, to send messages inside a POSIX program, you
would still use the usual Converse messaging primitives.

Suppressing Name Conflicts
--------------------------

Some people may wish to use Converse pthreads on machines that already
have a pthreads implementation in the standard library. This may cause
some name-conflicts as we define the pthreads functions, and the system
include files do too. To avoid such conflicts, we provide an alternative
set of names beginning with the word Cpthread. These names are
interchangeable with their pthread equivalents. In addition, you may
prevent Converse from defining the pthread names at all with the
preprocessor symbol SUPPRESS_PTHREADS:

.. code-block:: c++

   #define SUPPRESS_PTHREADS
   #include <cpthreads.h>

Interoperating with Other Thread Packages
-----------------------------------------

Converse programs are typically multilingual programs. There may be
modules written using POSIX threads, but other modules may use other
thread APIs. The POSIX threads implementation has the following
restriction: you may only call the pthreads functions from inside
threads created with pthread_create. Threads created by other thread
packages (for example, the CthThread package) may not use the pthreads
functions.

Preemptive Context Switching
----------------------------

Most implementations of POSIX threads perform time-slicing: when a
thread has run for a while, it automatically gives up the CPU to another
thread. Our implementation is currently nonpreemptive (no time-slicing).
Threads give up control at two points:

-  If they block (eg, at a mutex).

-  If they call pthread_yield().

Usually, the first rule is sufficient to make most programs work.
However, a few programs (particularly, those that busy-wait) may need
explicit insertion of yields.

Limits on Blocking Operations in main
-------------------------------------

Converse has a rule about blocking operations — there are certain pieces
of code that may not block. This was an efficiency decision. In
particular, the main function, Converse handlers, and the Converse
startup function (see ConverseInit) may not block. You must be aware of
this when using the POSIX threads functions with Converse.

There is a contradiction here — the POSIX standard requires that the
pthreads functions work from inside ``main``. However, many of them
block, and Converse forbids blocking inside ``main``. This contradiction
can be resolved by renaming your posix-compliant ``main`` to something
else: for example, ``mymain``. Then, through the normal Converse startup
procedure, create a POSIX thread to run ``mymain``. We provide a
convenience function to do this, called Cpthreads_start_main. The
startup code will be much like this:

.. code-block:: c++

   void mystartup(int argc, char **argv)
   {
     CpthreadModuleInit();
     Cpthreads_start_main(mymain, argc, argv);
   }

   int main(int argc, char **argv)
   {
     ConverseInit(mystartup, argc, argv, 0, 0);
   }

This creates the first POSIX thread on each processor, which runs the
function mymain. The mymain function is executing in a POSIX thread, and
it may use any pthread function it wishes.

CpthreadModuleInit
------------------

On each processor, the function CpthreadModuleInit must be called before
any other pthread function is called. This is shown in the example in
the previous section.

Parallel Arrays of Threads
==========================

This module is CPath: Converse Parallel Array of Threads. It makes it
simple to create arrays of threads, where the threads are distributed
across the processors. It provides simple operations like sending a
message to a thread, as well as group operations like multicasting to a
row of threads, or reducing over an array of threads.

Creating Arrays of Threads
--------------------------

This module defines a data type CPath, also known as an “array
descriptor”. Arrays are created by the function CPathMakeArray, and
individual threads are created using CPathMakeThread:

``void CPathMakeArray(CPath *path, int threadfn, int mapfn, ...)``

This
function initiates the creation of an array of threads. It fills in the
array descriptor ``*path``. Each thread in the array starts executing
the function represented by ``threadfn``. The function ``mapfn``
represents a mapping function, controlling the layout of the array. This
parameter must be followed by the dimensions of the array, and then a
zero.

``void CPathMakeThread(CPath *path, int startfn, int pe)``

This function makes a zero-dimensional array of threads, in other words,
just one thread.

Mapping Functions for Arrays of Threads
---------------------------------------

One of the parameters to CPathMakeArray is a “mapping function”, which
maps array elements to processors. Mapping functions must be registered.
The integer index returned by the registration process is the number
which is passed to CPathMakeArray. Mapping functions receive the array
descriptor as a parameter, and may use it to determine the dimensions of
the array.

``unsigned int MapFn(CPath *path, int *indices)``

This is a prototype map
function, all mapping functions must have this parameter list. It
accepts an array descriptor and a set of indices. It returns the
processor number of the specified element.

``int CPathRegisterMapper(void *mapfn)``

Accepts a pointer to a mapping function, and returns an integer index
for the function. This number can be used as a parameter to
CPathMakeArray.

``int CPathArrayDimensions(CPath *path)``

Returns the number of dimensions in the specified array.

``int CPathArrayDimension(CPath *path, int n)``

Returns the nth dimension of the specified array.

Thread Functions for Arrays of Threads
--------------------------------------

Thread functions (the functions that the threads execute) must have the
following prototype, and must be registered using the following
registration function. The integer index returned by the registration
process is the number which is passed to CPathMakeArray.

``void ThreadFn(CPath *self, int *indices)``

This is a prototype thread
function. All thread-functions must have these parameters. When an array
of threads is created, each thread starts executing the specified thread
function. The function receives a pointer to a copy of the array’s
descriptor, and the array element’s indices.

``int CPathRegisterThreadFn(void *mapfn)``

Accepts a pointer to a thread function, and returns an integer index for
the function. This number can be used as a parameter to CPathMakeArray.

Sending Messages to Threads
---------------------------

Threads may send messages to each other using CPathSend, which takes a
complicated set of parameters. The parameters are most easily described
by a context-free grammar:

``void CPathSend(dest-clause, tag-clause, data-clause, end-clause)``

Where:

.. code-block:: none

       dest-clause :== CPATH_DEST ',' pathptr ',' index ',' index ',' ...
       tag-clause  :== CPATH_TAG ',' tag
       tag-clause  :== CPATH_TAGS ',' tag ',' tag ',' ... ',' 0
       tag-clause  :== CPATH_TAGVEC ',' numtags ',' tagvector
       data-clause :== CPATH_BYTES ',' numbytes ',' bufptr
       end-clause  :== CPATH_END

The symbols ``CPATH_DEST``, ``CPATH_TAG``, ``CPATH_TAGS``,
``CPATH_TAGVEC``, ``CPATH_BYTES``, ``CPATH_END``, and the comma are
terminal symbols. The symbols descriptor, index, tag, numtags,
tagvector, numbytes, and bufptr all represent C expressions.

The dest-clause specifies which array and which indices the message is
to go to. One must provide a pointer to an array descriptor and a set of
indices. Any index may be either a normal index, or the wildcard
``CPATH_ALL``. Using the wildcard causes a multicast. The tag-clause
provides several notations, all of which specify an array of one or more
integer tags to be sent with the message. These tags can be used at the
receiving end for pattern matching. The data-clause specifies the data
to go in the message, as a sequence of bytes. The end-clause represents
the end of the parameter list.

Messages sent with CPathSend can be received using CPathRecv, analyzed
using CPathMsgDecodeBytes, and finally discarded with CPathMsgFree:

``void *CPathRecv(tag-clause, end-clause)``

The tag-clause and end-clause
match the grammar for CPathSend. The function will wait until a message
with the same tags shows up (it waits using the thread-blocking
primitives, see Converse threads). If any position in the CPathRecv
tag-vector is ``CPATH_WILD``, then that one position is ignored.
CPathRecv returns an “opaque CPath message”. The message contains the
data somewhere inside it. The data can be located using
CPathMsgDecodeBytes, below. The opaque CPath message can be freed using
CPathMsgFree below.

``void CPathMsgDecodeBytes(void *msg, int *len, void *bytes)``

Given an
opaque CPath message (as sent by CPathSend and returned by CPathRecv),
this function will locate the data inside it. The parameter ``*len`` is
filled in with the data length, and ``*bytes`` is filled in with a
pointer to the data bytes. Bear in mind that once you free the opaque
CPath message, this pointer is no longer valid.

``void CPathMsgFree(void *msg)``

Frees an opaque CPath message.

Performing Reductions over Array Elements
-----------------------------------------

An set of threads may participate in a reduction. All the threads
wishing to participate must call CPathReduce. The parameters to
CPathReduce are most easily described by a context-free grammar:

``void CPathReduce(over-clause, tag-clause, red-clause, data-clause,
dest-clause, end-clause)``

Where:

.. code-block:: none

       over-clause :== CPATH_OVER ',' pathptr ',' index ',' index ',' ...
       dest-clause :== CPATH_DEST ',' pathptr ',' index ',' index ',' ...
       tag-clause  :== CPATH_TAG ',' tag
       tag-clause  :== CPATH_TAGS ',' tag ',' tag ',' ... ',' 0
       tag-clause  :== CPATH_TAGVEC ',' numtags ',' tagvector
       data-clause :== CPATH_BYTES ',' vecsize ',' eltsize ',' data
       red-clause  :== CPATH_REDUCER ',' redfn
       end-clause  :== CPATH_END

The over-clause specifies the set of threads participating in the
reduction. One or more of the indices should be ``CPATH_ALL``, the
wildcard value. All array elements matching the pattern are
participating in the reduction. All participants must supply the same
over-clause. The tags-clause specifies a vector of integer tags. All
participants must supply the same tags. The reducer represents the
function used to combine data pairwise. All participants must supply the
same reducer. The data-clause specifies the input-data, which is an
array of arbitrary-sized values. All participants must agree on the
vecsize and eltsize. The dest-clause specifies the recipient of the
reduced data (which may contain ``CPATH_ALL`` again). The data is sent
to the recipient. The results can be received with CPathRecv using the
same tags specified in the CPathReduce. The results may be analyzed with
CPathMsgDecodeReduction, and freed with CPathMsgFree.

``void CPathMsgDecodeReduction(void *msg, int *vecsize, int *eltsize, void
*bytes)``

This function accepts an opaque CPath message which was created
by a reduction. It locates the data within the message, and determines
the vecsize and eltsize.

The function that combines elements pairwise must match this prototype,
and be registered with the following registration function. It is the
number returned by the registration function which must be passed to
CPathReduce:

``void ReduceFn(int vecsize, void *data1, void *data2)``

The reduce function accepts two equally-sized arrays of input data. It
combines the two arrays pairwise, storing the results in array 1.

``int CPathRegisterReducer(void *fn)``

Accepts a pointer to a reduction function, and returns an integer index
for the function. This number can be used as a parameter to CPathReduce.

.. [1]
   URL:\ \ ``http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Apps/SPRNG/www/``

.. [2]
   Email:\ \ ``ashoks@ncsa.uiuc.edu``
